Okay, so my name's John Stauffer.
I manage the OpenGL Engineering group.
So let's get right into it.
So what we're going to talk
about today is a brief overview
of what's new in OpenGL.
This will be what we have
done differently or optimized
since WWC last year.
Got to give you a yearly update
as we go through this session.
We're going to go into some basic tips.
We try to keep this short.
We want to get into the more advanced
optimization techniques for OpenGL.
Then we're going to get into some detail
on optimizing OpenGL texture uploads.
And then a new optimization
technique for asynchronously reading
pixels back off the graphics card,
which is very important for people who
are trying to get pixel data back off.
Vertex data throughput,
how to optimize your vertex data uploads,
making sure that you're
getting optimal performance,
uploading your vertex data up to the GPU.
One-shot images.
Sometimes you have images that are small.
Or aren't going to be reused.
And you just want to draw
them once up to the screen.
So we'll talk briefly
about how to optimize that.
Pixel copy operations,
how to optimally copy pixels around.
There's certain ways that
you can optimize that,
making sure that they
are VRAM to VRAM copies.
And using threads.
There's a lot of people out
there trying to use threads.
We see a lot of problems with that.
Want to briefly cover that and make sure
that people understand the limitations
and how to make that work optimally.
So briefly, optimization strategies.
There's two basic ways,
two basic things that
people are trying to do.
They're either trying to maximize
performance of their application,
or they may be trying to
minimize the CPU burden.
And depending on what your
application demands are,
you'll want to focus on one of
those two types of strategies.
And as you'll see in my presentation,
that effectively using the CPU can lead
to greater optimizations than just simply
just offloading all of your applications.
So there's two different
types of techniques.
Don't be sure that you understand
that the CPU is still a very
effective processing device
for getting performance.
performance.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so what's new?
Well,
we've spent a year optimizing OpenGL.
Some of the highlights are that
we've been focusing quite a bit
on immediate mode performance.
There's a number of applications
out there that have been ported
that use immediate mode performance,
immediate mode drawing modes
that make it a key optimization,
and we've been spending a lot of time
on that to try to help those types of
applications coming over to the platform.
Pixel transfer paths,
and what I mean by that is any
kind of copying of pixel data,
RGBA, RGB data, what have you.
We've been spending a lot of
time optimizing those paths
and continuing to improve that.
So if your application is
sending a lot of pixel data,
we're working on those paths.
Vertex program emulation for any
kind of application that needs to
run across all of our CPUs and is
relying on the vertex program feature.
We are continuing to improve the
emulation of vertex program on the CPU.
So you can run a vertex program
on all of our platforms and get
the best performance possible.
Asynchronous texture downloads,
as I mentioned before.
That is also a new feature
since the last time we talked,
something that's very important.
So as you can see,
we have a list of extensions
that we've added since last year,
quite a few.
We're continuing to
add features regularly,
and as fast as they get approved and
made a part of the OpenGL standard,
we will fold those into OpenGL.
Okay, so some basic tips.
Things that you don't want to do or
avoid is you want to avoid geoflushes.
Geoflushes,
what those do is they truncate the
command stream going to the processor
and flush that command up to the GPU.
Now,
the reason you want to avoid flushes,
one, is that it's a command,
it's a kernel trap,
so you want to avoid that kernel trap.
Secondly, you only have a limited
number of command buffers.
So if you keep issuing
geoflushes back to back,
you will run out of that resource,
and that will be a synchronization
point where we will have to wait
for the graphics processor to finish
processing those command buffers in
flight before we can get a free command
buffer to start working with again.
So we tell people just
to avoid geoflushes.
Now, there are points,
there are times when
you'll want to use those,
and we'll go into that
a little bit later.
I tell people never to use geofinish.
Geofinish is a truly asynchronous call.
What geofinish does is it submits
the command stream to the GPU.
So if you keep issuing
geoflushes back to back,
you will run out of that resource,
and that will be a synchronization
point where we will have to wait
for the graphics processor to finish
processing those command buffers in
flight before we can get a free command
buffer to start working with again.
So we tell people never
to use geoflushes.
Now, there are points,
there are times when we'll
want to use geofinish.
It submits the current commands, stops,
waits for the graphics
processor to be done with those
commands before it will return.
So it is truly a serialized
synchronization point that will cause the
CPU and GPU to stall against each other.
So I tell people just
don't call that at all.
Avoid GLREPIXELS if you can.
You would want to use some of
our more modern ways of doing it.
One of the techniques for replacing
GLREPIXELS is to use COPYPIXELS.
And COPYPIXELS is useful for
getting VRAM to VRAM copies.
So for instance, if you wanted to save
off some pixel data,
some depth data, some stencil data,
instead of reading it across the bus,
saving it with the CPU,
and then uploading it back,
what you want to do is you want
to use COPYPIXELS to store it
on the VRAM somewhere else.
Don't read it across the bus.
Save it somewhere in
another buffer up in VRAM,
and that way you can get the
high bandwidth of copying it and
restoring it when you need it.
So texture downloads is also a
good way to replace GLREPIXELS,
get an asynchronous
readback of your data,
and not have a stall of waiting
for the read pixels to finish.
So again, immediate mode performance,
we've been optimizing it,
but it is still one of the slower paths.
So we tell people when possible,
avoid immediate mode drawing.
Instead,
use some of our more advanced extensions.
Now, there's one exception to this,
and that is in display lists.
If you use immediate mode
drawing in display lists,
we will take that immediate mode data,
we will convert it into
a more optimal form,
and prepare the data and
then upload it into VRAM,
cache it in VRAM for you.
So display list is an acceptable
place to use immediate mode,
and it turns out that's fairly
convenient for a lot of people who
already are using immediate mode,
but they realize their data is static.
If your data is static,
you wrap a new list, end list around it.
We will post-process the data
and stick it in video memory,
and then you'll get the
benefit of that optimization.
So minimize state changes.
Most people that have been working
with Omnigil know this one.
State changes are expensive.
They do cause a revalidation
of the hardware state,
which can be slow if you do it a lot.
So avoid redundant state changes,
and do your drawing in groups of state.
So what you want to do is you
want to coalesce your drawing
under a given state setting,
which allows you to
minimize your state changes.
Okay, so let's get into more detail.
Texture uploads.
So what we're going to talk about
is we're going to talk about
the texture pipeline overview,
give people a brief description
of what the pipeline looks like.
We're going to talk about some
of the optimization basics,
and then we're going to get
into some of the extensions.
The extensions can be different
depending on whether you're talking
about a Power 2 or non-Power 2 texture.
So we'll differentiate a little bit
between those two types of textures.
For people who aren't familiar with that,
there are Power 2 textures,
which is more standard OpenGL,
and recently, over the last few years,
there's been the non-Power 2,
which allows you to have
a texture of any size,
which is very useful
for general image data,
video, pictures, what have you,
will use non-Power 2.
So here's a basic diagram
of the OpenGL pipeline.
The part that we're going to focus
in on for this section of the talk,
we're going to focus in
on the Pixel pipeline.
And looking at just a block diagram
of what the pipeline looks like,
standard OpenGL on Mac OS X,
you can end up with, at any time,
if you're passing a
texture through the system,
you can end up with
four copies of the data.
So, obviously, that's a lot, right?
You want to avoid those.
So, what we're going to talk about is
we're going to talk about how to
eliminate each one of those copies
and get you performance increases,
obviously, as you do that.
But in the default setting,
you can end up with four copies of your
texture as it passes through the system.
One copy is going to be
the copy that you have.
One is going to be
what the framework has.
One is going to be a copy
that the driver keeps.
And then one is going
to be in video memory.
So, let's get into some of
the ways to optimize that.
So, again,
minimizing CPU copies is the key here.
We don't want to give
the CPU redundant things.
We want to optimize its time.
So, correct setup will
minimize the CPU copies.
And what we mean by that is that you're
going to use the right texture formats,
the right pixel formats,
which will ensure optimal paths.
It will also ensure that the graphics
processor accepts that data type.
So, you know, OpenGL supports a very
large number of pixel types.
And the graphics processors also
accept quite a few pixel types.
But if you stay, if possible,
you want to stay in the middle,
you want to stay on the confined set
such that you are guaranteed that the
particular graphics processor you're
on has native support for that type.
And it won't have to go through some
kind of conversion to a type that is
compatible for that graphics processor.
So, here I've got listed three types.
BGRA and the 8888 reversed
and the 1555 reversed.
Now,
those are the native Macintosh formats.
So, when you set your monitor to
32-bit pixel mode or millions of
pixels or thousands of pixels,
those are the pixel types
that the screen is running in.
And that will give you a compatible type.
It also turns out that the graphics
processors understand that type natively.
Also, you'll see a YUV type there for
people who are doing video or want,
have a YUV source.
They can use a YUV texture and
that will be accepted as well.
So, when I usually put these up,
some people ask, "Well,
what about RGBA?" Which is
the standard OpenGL type.
RGBA isn't natively accepted
by all graphics processors.
Sometimes it will have to go
through a copy and get swizzled
into a different format.
So, usually it's fairly optimal copy and
sometimes it might be natively supported.
But, in general, you have to be a little
careful of that type.
So let's talk about the extensions.
So client storage is an Apple extension.
That extension is a way to eliminate
the framework's copy of a texture.
What it does is that instead of having
the framework make a copy of the texture,
the framework instead keeps a pointer
of that texture into your memory.
So if the application has
retained a copy of the texture,
you can just tell us, use my copy,
don't make a copy for yourself.
And that will eliminate one CPU copy,
that will eliminate the memory
associated with keeping that copy.
Apple Texture Range is
another Apple extension.
This extension eliminates
the driver's copy.
And there's two different
ways to drive this.
It's cached and shared.
What those mean is cached means
keep a copy of the driver.
It's telling the driver to keep a
copy of the texture in video memory.
Shared means simply point to
the copy in system memory when
you're doing your drawing.
And I'll get a little more
detail on this in a little bit.
But keep those concepts in mind.
They are important.
So now,
EXT Texture Rectangle is an extension
required by some hardware to allow
texture range to work properly.
And the reason for that is
that some hardware requires
the power of two textures to be
formatted in a certain format.
So if you don't use that extension,
you're not necessarily going to
be guaranteed on all graphics
processors to eliminate the graphics
driver's copy of the texture.
So keep in mind that Texture Rectangle
is a very important extension.
And Texture Rectangles tend to be more
widely supported for eliminating a
driver copy when using texture range.
OK.
So let's go back to the block diagram.
So what we see is that Client Storage,
using that,
we eliminate the framework copy,
as I said.
And looking at a little bit of source,
it's fairly simple.
All you do is you enable the
Client Storage option when
you are building your texture.
So before you load it,
just call PixelStoreI,
enabling the Client Storage option.
And that will eliminate
the framework copy.
Do remember that when you do that,
that you are now
responsible for the memory.
So if you go and delete
your copy of the texture,
the framework is pointing to that.
And if you try to do something that
requires us to access that memory,
you'll crash.
Now,
looking at the Apple Texture Range and
Apple Texture Rectangle extensions,
as I said before,
this eliminates the driver's copy.
And I'm showing a block diagram
here of it running in cached mode.
So what happens is,
using these two extensions,
the driver will be pointing directly
to the framework's copy and DMAing
it directly from the framework's
copy up into video memory and
keeping the copy in video memory.
That's running in cached mode.
Okay, and again,
here's a little code snippet
showing how to use Texture Range.
Very simple, one call.
Text param i,
texture rectangle extension, target type,
storage hint apple,
and then cached apple for the hint type.
Now, using all these together,
what we get is we get that the
graphics processor now is going to
be pointing the GPU directly to the
application's copy of the memory,
and it's going to be DMing it
directly into video memory.
So what you get is you've eliminated
the CPU actually making a copy.
We point directly to
your copy of the texture,
DM it directly.
So the CPU never actually
makes a pixel-to-pixel copy.
The graphics processor is DMing
it directly into video memory.
And looking at those
code snippets together,
it simply looks like this.
It adds basically two calls to this.
You'll see that I'm using
a texture rectangle type.
I've inserted the two previous code
snippets between the bind and the text
image 2D call so that I'm getting the
direct DMA transfer as I just showed.
Now, switching gears a little bit and
looking at the shared option.
Now, the shared option, as I said before,
makes it such that we are not
going to cache a copy of the GPU.
Instead, what we're going to do is we are
going to set it up such that the
graphics processor is going to look
up the textiles at rasterization
time directly from system memory.
So while it's drawing the polygon,
each time it goes to
have to fetch a textile,
it'll go across the AGP bus,
look it up out of system memory.
So that eliminates the copy
that's in video memory.
And there are some uses for that,
and I will show a demo of that shortly.
So here's what the code looks like.
It's the same thing as the cached.
Text param i, except for you would pass,
instead of the storage cached apple,
you would pass the storage shared apple,
hint, type, and that will mean don't
cache a copy in video memory.
Okay.
So, looking at the block diagram again.
So, this is what it looks like
when you run in shared mode.
There's no copy in video memory.
As you're rasterizing,
it is looking the textiles up directly
from the application's memory,
and you end up with one copy,
your copy in the application.
There's times when this is useful,
times when it's better to use cached.
Okay, so same code snippet.
All I had to do to get the
shared option in there,
again, is change the cache to shared.
I'm going kind of fast.
So what I should point out is
that this example is actually
available on the website.
You'll see at the bottom that
there is the sample name.
You can look this up,
and it has this code in there,
so you don't need to
be copying this down.
Okay, let's talk a little bit
about cache and shared,
when one is appropriate versus the other.
So cache mode is better for textures when
you're going to use it multiple times.
You don't want to be reading a texture
across the AGP bus multiple times.
So if you're going to use it a lot,
you're going to want to cache it
in video memory and then use it
from there multiple times and not
require it to go across the bus.
So it's also best when you're
using linear filtering.
Linear filtering is a little bit
higher bandwidth usage because
it's having to look up neighboring
textiles to do the linear filtering.
And now shared is -- talking
about shared for a second.
So shared is better for one-shot
images that are very large.
And the reason that I say very
large is that if you have low
video memory cases and if you
wanted to upload a large texture,
what you don't want to have
happen is that texture to,
say, evict everything else
out of video memory.
So if you're running in
a low video memory case,
you're going to want to have a
texture that's going to be able
to run in a low video memory case.
So if you're running in
a low video memory case,
you're going to want to have a
texture that's going to be able
to run in a low video memory case.
you're running in a
low video memory case,
it is possibly a benefit to run
in shared mode where you're not
going to consume any video memory.
You can leave what's resonant
in video memory there and just
look up your image straight,
DM8, as you're rasterizing as opposed
to DM8 into video memory.
There are some caveats to that,
and that is that the shared mode runs
best when running in nearest filtering.
If you're running in linear filtering,
again, as I said, as it's rasterizing,
it's going to be looking
up those textiles.
Well, if you're running in linear filter,
linear filtering requires neighboring
textiles and it'll fetch more textiles
from the neighboring part of the texture,
which will cause you
some performance degrade.
As well, shared works really well when
you're scaling the image down.
For the same reason I just said,
if you're scaling it down,
it's not going to have to pull
all the pixels across a bus.
So for Power2, briefly talk about that.
All the same extensions I just talked
about are actually applicable to Power2.
This is the same code snippet I had,
and all I did was replace the
rectangle texture option with
the texture 2D enumerant type.
And the difference here is that,
as I mentioned before,
Power2 sometimes won't
get you a direct DMA.
So not all graphics
processors support direct DMA,
and instead what will happen
is the driver will make a copy.
You can still use the options,
all the same extensions
I've been talking about,
but sometimes you won't
get the direct DMA.
Okay, let's talk about how to
manage texture range.
Now, as we saw in the diagram,
the graphics processor is going to be
starting to look directly at your memory.
Okay,
so the graphics processor and CPU now
are going to be sharing the same
piece of memory as it's rasterizing.
Now, there's a problem with that,
and that is that you are now
going to have to synchronize the
CPU and the graphics processor
such that they don't collide.
You can't have the CPU and
the GPU reading the same piece
of data at the same time,
right?
It's a standard problem when
you have multiple devices.
It's looking at the same piece of data.
So what you want to do is you're
going to have to double buffer it,
and between double buffering,
you're going to have to issue a flush.
So I've got a diagram here.
I'll show this.
So if you're running single buffer mode,
and you have the CPU just
generated texture,
let's say read it in or decompressed it,
and now the CPU is going to want to
flush that up to the graphics processor,
so it issues a geo-flush to get that
command in flight and get the transfer
of that data up into video memory,
and then the graphics processor is
going to do its work of processing
it and swapping it to the screen.
So there you just did one frame, right?
And when single buffered,
I have to synchronize my CPU and
GPU serializing the processing
because I only have one data set.
Only one can work on it at a time.
So as we build through this,
this is how the frames go.
I can only have the CPU and
GPU working one at a time.
Now, if I go with double buffering,
let's see what happens.
So let's say we start this sequence.
CPU generated a frame.
It flushes it.
Now, in the next frame,
I can see that if I had double buffering,
the CPU can start working on
the second texture while the
GPU is processing the first,
right?
So now we can flush the second
one and swap the first one.
So I just showed one frame while
I'm submitting the next one to the
graphics processor for processing,
and likewise, it continues on, right?
Now, the CPU can start working
back on texture one,
and the GPU is working on texture two,
and so on and so on.
And basically, if you had, you know,
this is an exaggeration where
you have perfect parallelization,
but it does make a difference.
It does make a difference where
you are getting asynchronous
behavior between the CPU and GPU.
Okay.
Fence.
So let's talk about how to synchronize.
How do we synchronize the two commands?
How do I know when the GPU is
done processing my data,
for instance?
So it's pointing at my data set.
How do I know when it's
done accessing that data?
Well, if you're using texture range,
what you need to use is
the Apple Fence extension.
And the Apple Fence extension,
what you can do is you insert a
token into the command stream,
and you can query for the
token to determine when it
is done reading your texture,
so that you'll know that it
is now safe for the CPU to
start touching the data again.
So there's a couple ways to do that.
You can use it by inserting a token,
or you can actually use it
straight by accessing or
referencing a texture object.
And a texture object is just
your standard texture ID,
and what you'll do is in the
fenced object test object command,
you just send it the texture.
the geotexture object type.
So looking at a little
bit of code for that.
So the first two commands here
talk about how to set up a fence.
So you just do a GL set fence apple.
You can pass it any name you want,
just a token that you pass
into the command stream.
And then when you are ready to start
touching the texture again with the CPU,
you would then test to make
sure that the GPU is done.
And that's a synchronization point
where the CPU will wait for the
GPU to be done reading that data,
and at which point then you can
start touching it again with CPU.
Now the last command up on this screen
is the way that you could use it,
the fence extension.
Without having to set a fence explicitly,
you can just test for a texture object.
And all you would do is just call the
finished object apple with the GL texture
target type and the name of the texture.
So if you bound to a texture,
you would just test against
that same texture ID number.
Okay.
So we're going to switch
to demo machine two.
So what I wanted to show here
is an example of texture range.
So you'll notice that the
CPU is doing very little here.
First thing I wanted to point out
very quickly is that the CPU is
continuing to do very little.
And that's a sign that the CPU is
not making copies of the pixels,
right?
Because if the CPU was
copying the pixels,
I would be seeing a big
spike in CPU processing time.
Instead, what's happening is the graphics
processor is talking directly
to the memory controller,
getting a direct DMA.
So the data is not going through the CPU.
So now I'm going to turn
on my Infinite button.
It's a button I recommend
everyone put on their app.
Make it go infinitely fast.
So even though now I'm
doing 240 frames a second,
I'm getting a gigabyte a
second across the AGP bus,
I still have no CPU time.
Because again,
the CPU is not doing anything here.
The CPU is orchestrating this
and not copying the data.
It's simply directing the traffic,
as you might think of it that way.
Now,
what I really wanted to show with this
example is using the shared option.
So as I said before,
the cached option is good
for drawing multiple times.
But the shared option is good
when you shrink an image down.
Now, it turns out this image
actually is 1024 by 1024.
It's a lot larger than my window.
So if I switch to shared mode,
now you'll see I'm getting
three gigabytes a second.
Well, that's not even possible.
The application thinks it is, though.
And the reason is that
I've shrunk the image.
It's nearest to filtering.
Some of the textiles of that image
aren't actually going across the AGP bus.
Because the graphics processor is
skipping scan lines and skipping
pixels and only selecting the
ones it needs to draw the image.
So now I'm getting 700 frames a second,
as opposed to one gigabyte a
second and 240 frames a second.
So quite a boost.
It doesn't take any video memory,
because I'm not caching
and copying video memory.
I'm reading it directly across the bus.
So there's times when this type
of technique can be a large win.
I'm going to switch back slides.
Okay, asynchronous texture downloads.
Let's talk about how to
set up texture range.
I'm sorry.
Asynchronous texture downloads
are basically the same thing
as uploading a texture,
where we just talked about,
where you set up a texture as
an AGP texture for direct DMing.
Asynchronous texture
downloads is the same setup,
but in reverse.
So you set up the texture the same way,
and then you use copy text subimage
to copy the data into that texture.
So the way it works is that the copy
text subimage is the call that initiates
the transfer from video memory back
into your texture and system memory.
The reverse.
And that is an autonomous call
that will happen asynchronously.
So the next time you issue a flush,
there will be a copy text
subimage call in there,
and the flush will issue a copy,
a DMA transfer from video
memory into system memory.
Okay?
And that's autonomous.
The CPU doesn't need to wait
for that event to happen.
Now, there needs to be a
synchronization point,
because the CPU needs a new system.
Now, there needs to be a
synchronization point,
because the CPU needs to
know when that's done.
So what you use is you use,
at some later point,
you use the get text image call,
and that's a synchronization point that
will wait until the transfer is done.
Now, hopefully you've done enough
processing between your copy text
subimage and your get text image,
where the transfer is done,
and you don't have to stall and wait.
So the idea here is that you
separate those as far as you can,
maybe double buffer them,
triple buffer them,
do some processing between those.
So the basic setup of those is that,
again, it's the same.
The get text image will take the
same pointer as you originally
passed it for the texture,
and the parameters must match
the setup of the texture.
So however you set up the texture,
those same parameters will be
used in these calls as well.
And, again,
you do this as late as possible to
get the maximum asynchronous behavior.
So let's look at a little bit of code.
The setup, you'll notice,
the asynchronous setup is the same
as it is for a texture upload.
It's exactly the same.
Now,
the download is the key part of this.
And all you have to do,
the two key calls,
are the copy text subimage
and the get text image.
If you issue those calls on
a properly set up texture,
you'll get an asynchronous download.
And on my systems at work,
I can get about 500 megabytes
a second download performance,
which is usually pretty
acceptable for most people,
particularly considering that
can be an asynchronous operation.
Okay, let's talk about vertex data.
So you'll notice in this part of the talk
that vertex data setup and optimizations
is about the same as texture,
it's just a different data type.
So a lot of the parts of
the discussion are the same.
And all we're going to do is walk
you through and point out some of the
differences and peculiarities of this.
So we're going to go
through a pipeline overview,
we're going to talk
about the basics again,
and then we're going to
talk about the extensions.
Now, we're going to separate
dynamic and static data,
talk about some differences,
and get a little bit more
detail on display lists.
So in this part of the talk,
we're going to point out the
geometry part of the pipeline,
not the pixel part of the pipeline.
And let's talk about some basics.
So the first thing is that
you want to pick data types,
like in the pixel talk,
you want to pick data types
that are most optimal.
And the most optimal for
the vertex paths are floats,
shorts, and unsigned bytes.
If possible, stick with those types.
Most graphics processors will
handle those types natively,
so you will be able to get
optimal upload performance.
And in some of the cases where
the CPU might be making a copy,
we've spent time optimizing those paths.
So these are the ones that will
give you optimal performance.
The other basic point of optimizing
vertex upload performance is that you
want to avoid function call overhead.
Now, obviously, immediate mode,
where you're sending one
vector of data per call,
is pretty inefficient as
far as a copy routine.
What you want to be able to do
is use a vertex array calls,
draw arrays,
draw elements to get the data
through the system with minimal
function calls as possible.
Another good technique
is to use CGL macros.
CGL macros is a way to directly
reduce function call overhead.
And I'll show an example of that.
It can be pretty dramatic how efficient
you can make the function calls when
you start using the function parts.
So you can see that the function points
are in the top-level library interpoints.
So that's a concept that people may want
to keep in mind if they are seeing or if
they're making a lot of function calls.
So another key concept is if you are
-- when you're drawing vertex data,
passing vertex data into OpenGL,
you want to maximize the number
of vertices per draw command.
So if you're using arrays,
you want to maximize the number
of vertices per draw command.
So if you're using arrays,
you want to maximize the number
of vertices per draw command.
You want to get as many vertices
per begin end as possible.
And that can make a
significant performance
improvement if you can do that.
Another optimization technique is
to offload CPU processing using
vertex programs onto the GPU.
So if you have computational processing
you're doing on the vertices,
think about trying to offload
that work to a vertex program
on the graphics processor.
Okay.
So how do we eliminate CPU copies?
Another key concept is almost
the exact same as the textures.
What we can use is we can use
the Apple Vertex Array Range,
which is a parallel API to
the texture range extension.
And you could also think about
using the new ARB standard,
which is Vertex Buffer Object.
Those are nearly the same type of API.
One is cross-platform.
The ARB Vertex Buffer Object is a
cross-platform API that will allow
you to optimize your vertex data.
It's a cross-platform API that allows you
to optimize your vertex data throughput.
Caching static data in
VRAM is a key concept here.
Just like textures,
you want to be able to
cache that data in VRAM.
Use display list for
VRAM for static data.
Again, we'll process that data and
cache that in VRAM for you if
you want to use display list.
It's a very effective way to get your
data processed properly and into VRAM.
So looking at the pipeline,
like textures,
there can be multiple copies of the
data as it goes through the pipeline.
This is showing a media mode drawing.
A media mode drawing,
we are required to keep the current
vertex state before we pass it
on to the graphics processor.
So using immediate mode,
you get one extra copy immediately.
So if I switch to using vertex arrays,
I can eliminate that one copy
just by using vertex arrays.
So I'm saving myself some processing
time by using vertex arrays immediately.
Now, let's go into some talking
about these extensions.
So, Apple Vertex Array
Range for dynamic data,
what you want to do is you want to
pass it the storage shared apple,
just like on the textures,
we were using the shared hint for
how we want the data to be treated.
And for the Arb vertex buffer object,
we want to use the
dynamic draw Arb constant,
which is the equivalent to
our storage shared constant.
So, it will give you the optimal
treatment for dynamic data.
And what happens when we use these
extensions combined with vertex arrays?
We end up with the same
thing we had for textures,
and that is we get a direct DMA from the
application's copy of the data directly
into the graphics processor's pipeline.
So it will read it directly into
its pipeline and process it.
No copies in video memory.
So, looking at some sample code,
how to set up for dynamic
data using vertex array range.
It's very simple.
There's two calls that are key to this.
Vertex array range, Apple,
you just set it a pointer and a size,
and that tells us how big of a
piece of memory you want to map.
You malloc the data, you give it to us,
tell us where the pointer
is and what size it is.
We map and AGP prepare it for a
suitable storage area for direct DMA.
Now, you need to make sure
you flush that data.
So, you need to tell us
when the data's changed.
So,
you have to call the flush vertex array
range Apple call anytime you change data.
That includes initially when
you first set it up or when
you modify some sub-region.
You tell us a pointer and a
size that you want us to flush.
It can flush sub-regions.
It can flush the whole thing.
You tell us anytime you change the data,
and we'll make sure that all caches,
all copies, all are synchronized with
your copy of the data.
Okay, Vertex Buffer Object,
a little more setup.
Not much more, though.
You'll see that we bind.
Buffer Object has an object-type
binding where you will bind to a name,
and that will give you the ability
to switch between buffer objects.
So what you want to do is
you can create many of these,
and you can bind to them as you need to.
And what you do is you pass
in your pointer and the size,
just like you set up your data size,
basically, using the buffer data.
And in that call,
you'll see that we're passing
here the dynamic draw,
and that tells us that this
particular buffer object is going
to be set up for dynamic drawing,
and we're going to be
changing the data frequently.
And then you call Map Buffer.
Map Buffer then actually is
where you get the pointer back.
So instead of you allocating the memory,
OpenGL is going to allocate the memory
for you and hand back the pointer.
Then you fill out the data,
and then you unmap it.
And on Unmap is the
equivalent of our flush.
So Unmap, we flush the data out,
and now the GPU is,
all the caches have been synchronized
and ready for using that data.
So again, you'll see that the sample
code that shows this is listed
at the bottom of the slide.
It's going to be available tonight
up on the server so that everyone
will be able to download this.
We've updated it with vertex buffer
objects so that you'll be able to
see how to use the new extension.
Okay, static data.
So static data is almost
like dynamic data,
it just uses different constants.
So we can use,
for Apple vertex array range,
we use the storage cached Apple hint.
Or for arb vertex buffer object,
we use the static draw arb constant.
And the rest of the setup's the same,
basically.
You just pass the different constants.
Display lists, again,
between a begin end,
you can use immediate mode
between a begin end call.
We'll post-process the data to put it
in an optimal format for uploading.
A couple key things to remember
for display lists is that you
want to keep the data in a,
pass it consistent vertices.
So, and what I mean by that is
that if you pass a GL begin,
and then you pass a
GL color and a normal,
and then you pass it a GL normal,
I'm sorry, pass it a color, a vertex,
and then you pass it
a normal and a vertex,
you're passing different
types of data per vertex.
And what that does is it'll
actually confuse our optimizer,
make it such that it
won't optimize the data,
and you won't actually
get any benefit from it.
So what you want to do is
the first vertex you call,
you want to make sure that you're
passing all the data that you're
going to be required per vertex.
So if I need a normal and a color,
pass a normal and color
for the first vertex,
then you can call anything you
want as long as you don't call,
say,
something besides a color and a normal.
I'm not sure that's 100% clear,
but we can talk about it more.
Okay,
so vertex array range and display list.
So what that gets us for static data is,
like textures,
we can cache the data in VRAM.
And there's three
different ways to do it,
as you'll see.
There's the vertex array range.
There's the vertex array range
display list or vertex buffer object.
They get you basically the same behavior,
and that means that you're
caching static data in VRAM,
and now when you reuse that data,
you're getting the full bandwidth
out of the graphics processor bus,
and it gets you a significant
performance boost.
Okay, looking at static data setup,
similar to the dynamic data setup,
where you are passing the cached
hint instead of the shared hint
for the vertex array range.
and again, for the vertex buffer object,
all you would do is change it from
being the dynamic to the static
draw arb constant for the static
data setup for vertex buffer object.
and parallel talk about how
to synchronize your data.
So if you're using vertex array range,
the application and the graphics
processor could be sharing the same data,
so you're going to need to be able
to synchronize and flush between,
manage the synchronization and
flush between your draws if you're
going to double buffer the data.
So it's the same type of operation,
right?
CPU's generating data,
flushes it to the GPU.
GPU now is going to process the data.
It's going to flush it up to
the screen for single buffering.
And the CPU and GPU are going to
be running in series-- serialized.
They're not going to be in
parallel-- operating parallel.
So let's see.
Same all the way through the frames.
And for double buffering the data,
now again, what we can do is we can have
the CPU process the data,
flush it to the GPU,
and as the GPU's processing,
CPU can start processing the data again,
and so on.
"Through the frames,
we can theoretically get up to
double the performance for something
that's perfectly parallelized."
Okay.
Similar to the texture range,
you use the fence for synchronizing
the vertex array range data.
You'll need to know when the
GPU is done processing the data.
So what you do is you would
set a fence or you would use
the test object mechanism for
referencing a vertex array object.
And that will let you know when
that processing has been completed
so that you can start touching
the data again with the CPU.
So the fence extension is
what you'll be looking for to
use for vertex array range.
And vertex buffer objects
don't require this.
They have their own
synchronization mechanism.
And it's the -- you map,
you change your data, and you unmap.
So you don't need to use the fence
extension for the buffer object,
only for the vertex
array range extension.
Just like the textures,
looking at some sample code.
First two are the same,
where I'm setting a fence and finishing
against that token I've inserted,
the finish fence.
And then the third line
of code down there is,
instead of using a GL texture type,
I'm using a vertex array type for
testing against a vertex object type.
And that will allow me to set
a synchronization point where
I can be guaranteed the graphics
processor is done touching the
data in the vertex array range,
and allow me to synchronize
the graphics processor and CPU.
So here's a little bit of history here.
So last year I showed this slide.
Not quite.
I showed it going out
a little bit further.
But I wanted to show
what we've been doing.
So I talked about some optimizations.
What this slide shows is what
exactly the data I showed last year.
And with all the hardware
changes and software changes
we've made over the year,
here's where we are this year.
So it's a huge increase in performance.
And looking at some charts here.
So if we look at a
medium-load performance,
for eight vertices per begin-end,
we've gone up 800%. Vertex arrays,
1,100%, 1,000% for vertex array range,
and 1,700% for display lists.
Now this is using very small,
only eight vertices per draw command.
So it's a very small data
set per draw command.
So this shows some of the
functional overhead associated
with small drawing batches.
Looking at another chart,
another point in that chart,
this is using 42 vertices
per draw command.
So this is a little more optimal setup.
But you'll see that we're still making
quite a bit of performance gains,
up to 477% for immediate mode.
So as I said, we're working quite a
bit on immediate mode.
So since last year,
we've almost increased performance
of our systems by 500%. And this
is not only a software change,
but a hardware change, right?
So this is comparing
state-of-the-art hardware,
software last year,
and software this year.
500% faster almost.
Okay, switching demo two.
please.
Okay, what I wanted to show here is just
some of the effects I talked about.
So here I've got just a simple mesh.
This only has eight vertices per strip.
You can see that I'm only
getting 1.5 million triangles
a second with immediate mode.
Now, if I increase the detail of this
mesh by selecting this option,
so now I'm up to a mesh that
has 198 vertices per strip.
You'll see that my performance
jumped dramatically.
Now I'm up to 12 million
triangles a second.
Now, as I said before,
you can reduce function call
overhead using CGL macro.
So I've got an option here
to turn on CGL macros.
So I just select CGL macros,
and you'll see that I went
from 12,000 to 17,000.
So I got 5 million triangles
a second in immediate mode
performance by enabling CGL macros.
It's a really large difference.
But now let's see what we get when we
use a more optimal form of drawing.
So I'm going to switch now from
immediate mode to just draw arrays.
Now I go to 24 million.
So draw arrays is more optimal than
the best you can make immediate mode.
Now if I try using some of the
extensions we talked about,
let's switch to vertex array range.
So draw arrays with vertex array range.
I go to 50 million.
Okay, so we're making some
pretty good strides here.
Now let's say my data's static,
which this happens to be.
Now let's go switch to display list.
Now again,
display lists are set up to cache
the data static in video memory.
I'll be using the bus bandwidth
available on the graphics processor.
So I go from 50 million
to over 100 million.
So we started off at just a few million,
and now we're up at 100 million.
So using the proper extensions,
understanding how to optimally pass your
data through the system can make a very,
very large difference.
OK, back to slides, please.
Okay, one-shot images.
The best way to pass up one-shot images
that are small is using draw pixels.
The reason being is that the
overhead of small images is not
going to be the copy of the data,
which draw pixels does.
Draw pixels will always
copy your pixel data.
It's the functional overhead of
getting in and out of the system.
So you have to weigh off the functional
cost of the driving OpenGL versus
the expense of copying the pixels.
So draw pixels works really
well for small images.
And I recommend that you
experiment with this.
If your images are smaller
than 128 by 128 pixels in size,
Now,
one of the keys for making DropPixels
go fast is you want to disable
any complex rasterization state.
And the reason for that is
that DropPixels goes fastest
when we're not going through,
really, the 3D pipeline.
As much as we're allowing the graphics
processor to use its 2D pipeline,
we can just get a straight
blit into the frame buffer.
So we're not doing blending,
we're not doing dithering, no stenciling,
alpha testing,
nothing that the 3D pipe needs to do
so we can stay on the 2D pipeline.
So disable complex state will
get you the best performance.
and again, this demo is available
on the website today,
so people can look at the example
I'm going to be running here.
Okay, so simple little code snippet.
Disable complex state,
and then you issue draw pixels.
Again, same with textures.
You want to use a pixel format that is
supported by the graphics processor,
so we don't have to do
expensive conversions.
Because if you pass in
some type like a float,
we're going to have to
convert it to something the
graphics processor can handle,
and that may be slower
than you would like to see.
Okay, so back to demo two, please.
So this is a demo showing draw pixels.
Again, I put the fast button on there,
something I do highly recommend.
So if I zoom this down to something very
small-- and you can't almost see it,
and I apologize.
But it's two pixels by two pixels.
So you can see I'm getting a million
draw pixel commands per second.
Now, you can see I'm only getting 15
megabytes a second of bandwidth of
actual pixel copying performance.
I'm getting a million draw commands.
Now, as I move this up in size,
[Transcript missing]
So, and this is kind of the boundary
of which I was describing,
is that small images are
going to go really fast,
larger images are going to start
hitting a memory bandwidth limit,
and you might want to start
considering some of the other
techniques for uploading textures
for doing this operation.
Okay.
Please back to slides.
Okay, so let's talk about pixel
copy operations real quickly.
So the key to pixel copy operations
is to get VRAM to VRAM performance.
You can get extremely high bandwidth if
you don't have to come across the bus.
So anytime you're storing data that you
want to have temporary stashed off and
you want to be able to restore it back,
copy pixels is a great way to do that.
Now, where you want to store the data,
there's a couple options.
One is to use an auxiliary buffer.
Auxiliary buffers,
you can create an auxiliary buffer.
Apple has extensions where you can
have auxiliary buffers that have depth
and stencil associated with them,
such that you can copy a depth buffer,
a stencil buffer,
or a color buffer off into a temporary
location and then use copy pixels
to copy back to restore your data.
So if you wanted to refresh any
one of those types of buffers,
an auxiliary buffer
will work well for you.
Okay, so let's talk about
pixel copy operations.
So the first option is to
use an auxiliary buffer.
Auxiliary buffers are a
great way to store data.
So you can use an auxiliary
buffer to store data.
Just like with DropPixels, CopyPixels,
you'll want to have the state
in a very simple form because
you want to use a 2D pipeline.
When you're copying from
one memory location,
the graphics processor,
video memory to another,
you want to have the 2D engine
do that operation if possible.
And to do that,
you want to minimize your state,
have your state in a
very simple settings.
And it turns out it's basically
the same thing as DropPixels.
It has the same basic restrictions.
So you'll want to disable as much
of the state as you can to try
to get that VRAM to VRAM 2D blit.
Okay, so looking at the little
piece of sample code for that,
you just disable your state,
you set up your read
buffer and draw buffer,
and then I copy pixels.
So here you can see that I'm going to
copy data from the auxiliary buffer,
maybe where I stored
the data temporarily,
back into the back buffer for restoring,
say, a depth buffer, or in this case,
a color buffer, and getting a very fast
restore of that image.
Okay.
Threads.
Let's talk about threads a little bit.
So rules for threading are, well,
first off, let's talk about what
I'm going to talk about.
Rules for threading is
what I'm going to go over.
And then I'm going to talk
about divisions of work.
How you can,
what kind of strategies you can
use for dividing up your open gel
processing onto multiple threads.
What are some of the
effective techniques?
Sharing data between contexts.
How do you effectively share data?
You can set up multiple contexts to
have them share some common data set.
Synchronizing your threads.
We'll go over a little bit about
what is the proper mechanisms for
synchronizing multiple threads.
[Transcript missing]
Let's talk about division
to work a little bit.
So possibilities are moving
OpenGL onto a separate thread.
So you can have your application on one
thread and OpenGL on a separate thread,
a very obvious way of doing it.
That's not always the optimal way.
So another thing you can think
about is splitting OpenGL vertex
and texture processing.
That's very useful for when you
want to have video data or you're
generating some pixel data coming
from a disk or coming from some source
that you want to load into OpenGL,
and then you want a second
thread to be drawing it.
So you can have OpenGL have
multiple threads,
one for loading and one for drawing.
So, what gets shared between contexts?
So, a lot of times,
people don't clearly understand when
you have multiple contexts set up
to share each other's object state.
The things that get
shared are display lists,
textures, vertex and fragment programs,
and vertex array objects.
That data gets shared when
you share two contexts.
So, that data set will become common
between multiple contexts,
if you set them up properly,
and we will manage the mutex
locking of accessing that data.
Okay, and like I said,
you can share an OpenGL surface.
So you can also set it up
such that a multiple context
can talk to one VRAM buffer.
So let's look at some
diagrams of how that looks.
So here in the red circles,
I've got threads.
And on the left, I've got the application
doing some CPU processing.
It passes that data
off to the thread two.
Thread two then takes that data
and uses it to draw some OpenGL.
Very simple.
Simply using one OpenGL context.
OpenGL is on its own thread.
Here's an example of splitting
OpenGL across multiple threads.
Now, what I've got here is
I've got two threads,
one OpenGL context per thread.
I've got them set up such that
they're sharing OpenGL state,
and I've got it such that they are
talking to the same video memory surface.
So they share state,
they share the VRAM buffer,
and we manage the object's shared state.
And what this shows is just
using texture data on one thread
and vertex data on another.
Obviously, those are arbitrary.
You can obviously mix those up,
have any kind of inputs
from either talking to the
shared object state machine.
Slight different variation on that,
if people want to use P buffers,
obviously you can have one talking,
one thread talking to a P buffer,
and then link that P buffer into
the shared state for as a texture,
and then referencing a
P buffer for drawing,
and using thread one to
draw using that P buffer,
draw some scene that is using
generated textures as a P buffer.
So, looking at a little
bit of setup code here.
So this is using Cocoa.
So this is how to set up a
shared context using Cocoa.
So you'll see that I create a context,
and then I knit with a pixel format,
and I'm passing in a shared context.
So the third line down
is a shared context,
and that's the way you can link two
contexts together to have a common
object shared data structures.
And that allows you to share textures,
display lists, programs,
vertex object data.
Okay, so synchronization between threads.
The way you want to do that is you
want to use standard OS thread locking.
Use NSThread, NSLock, for instance.
One example,
obviously you can use any other type of
OS-level facility for managing threads.
And I guess the main point of this
slide is that there's nothing in
OpenGL to manage your threads.
It's synchronization.
It's standard OS tools,
facilities that do that.
Don't use the Apple Fence extension
for managing your threads.
Apple Fence extension is for managing
synchronization between CPU and GPU,
not between two CPU threads.
So that's an important point to
remember if you're going to start
dabbling in multiple threads.
And by the way, just as a point,
if you mess up threads and you
have multiple OpenGL contexts,
multiple OpenGL threads
talking into the same context,
you will cause all kinds of bad things.
And bad things can go as
far as hanging your system.
You'll introduce a bad command
into the graphics processor.
The graphics processor may hang
and your screen will wedge and
the CPU will block up against that
and everybody will come to a halt.
Okay,
so let's switch to demo machine two,
please.
So in the beginning of this talk,
I talked about effectively
using CPU and the GPU.
And one of the things
I wanted to show is,
first off,
we wrote a Altavec routine of this
little sinusoidal wave simulator here.
And you'll see it's going pretty fast.
It's generating 18 million
triangles a second.
So what we've got here on this chart
is we've got the red time at the bottom
is time spent in the system outside
of just the application or OpenGL.
The green is time spent
calculating the wave,
and blue is time spent in OpenGL.
So I'm going to just multi-thread that.
I'm going to split it across both of
the CPUs that I have on the system.
So that bumped my
performance up a little bit.
I was at 19.
Now I'm up to 21-something.
And you can see that I've
improved performance a little bit.
Now the thing that is surprising,
this actually has a high-end
graphics card in it.
And now what I'm going to do is I'm
going to move the wave calculation
into a vertex program onto the GPU.
So before I do that,
you'll see that the CPUs are very busy.
There's a lot of time going into
calculating this wave with the CPU.
And now I'm going to move the
wave calculation off onto the GPU.
And the thing to watch
is the performance.
or 21 million triangles a second,
338 frames a second.
And look at that.
It dropped down to 15 million.
And I know there's people out
here from the hardware vendors,
and they're saying, no,
that can't be possible.
Our hardware always can outrun the CPU,
but it's not true.
The CPU is really good at some things.
And you can actually write really
efficient code sometimes that'll
outrun the graphics processors.
And you'll see that, by the way,
notice that the CPU is
now barely doing anything,
but my performance went down.
So that kind of is what I'm
trying to point out here,
is that if your goal
is maximum performance,
sometimes you want the
CPU to be doing work.
But if your goal is to
have the CPU do nothing,
for sure offload all the
processing onto the GPU,
and the CPU can be free
to do something else.
But that won't guarantee
maximum performance.
Maximum performance will be
found by experimenting what
the optimal combination is.
Okay, back to slides, please.
Okay, let's wrap up.
Okay, so after this session,
there's a couple more
OpenGL sessions that are really
good and I recommend people go to.
There's the optimization live session,
which is going to have a live
session talking about our tools,
using our tools, the OpenGL profiler,
OpenGL driver monitor,
live on stage showing
people how to use it.
Really good session.
I find that I'm always
using the OpenGL profiler
for analyzing applications,
figuring out where the bottlenecks are,
what I need to be optimizing.
It's a similar tool for
OpenGL as Shark is for the CPU.
And then on Friday,
we've got the introduction to
the OpenGL Shader Language.
For those that don't know what
the OpenGL Shader Language is,
it's a good introduction to
what that language looks like,
some of the capabilities it has,
and highly recommended for
people that are interested in
programming the graphics processor.
And who to contact?
Contact myself or Travis Brown.
If people want to talk to me,
they can come up afterwards and
I can give them a business card,
so you don't need to write
that down too quickly.
So for more information,
you can go to the Apple website.
So it's developer.apple.com/opengl.
That's a good resource for
OpenGL information from Apple.
Or you can go to the OpenGL.org website,
the www.opengl.org.
That's OpenGL's official website.
It contains specifications,
pointers to a variety of resources
that people will find useful.
and reference libraries.
So we do have some references out there.
You might want to take note of these.
A couple of documentations
that are out on the system.